Standalone vs. host applications overview page (#840)
MicrosoftDocs/quantum-docs-pr: articles/user-guide/host-programs.md

To access them, the compiler needs to be made aware of which namespaces to open.

So, the full Q# file containing our operation consists of defining our own namespace, opening the namespaces for the operations our operation uses, and then our operation:

```qsharp
namespace NamespaceName {
    open Microsoft.Quantum.Intrinsic;     // for the H operation
    open Microsoft.Quantum.Measurement;   // for MResetZ

    operation MeasureSuperposition() : Result {
        using (q = Qubit()) { 
            H(q);
            return MResetZ(q);
        }
    }
}
```

### Execution of a Q# program

Now the general execution model of a Q# program becomes clear.

<br/>
<img src="./images/general_execution_model.png" alt="Q# program execution diagram" width="400">

Firstly, the specific operation to be executed has access to any other callables and types defined in the same namespace.
Thanks to `open` statements, it can also access those from any of the [Q# libraries](xref:microsoft.quantum.libraries). 

The operation itself is then executed on a *[target machine](xref:microsoft.quantum.machines)*.

> In the future, one such target machine will be a real quantum computer, but there are currently multiple simulators available, each with a particular use.

Reviewer: I think we can stop saying "in the future" and "real" as we are able to provide quantum hardware as target machines on Azure Quantum now as private preview. 
 ```suggestion
Such target machine can be quantum hardware, and multiple simulators available, each with a particular use.
```

For our purposes here, the most useful target machine is instance of the full-state simulator, `QuantumSimulator`, which calculates the program's behavior as if it were being executed on a noise-free quantum computer.

So far, we've described what happens when a specific Q# operation is being executed.
Regardless of whether Q# is used in a standalone application or with a host program, this general process is more or less the same---hence the QDK's flexibility.
The differences between the different ways of calling into the Quantum Development Kit therefore reveal themselves in *how* that Q# operation is called to be executed, and in what manner any results are returned.

> First, we discuss how this done with the Q# standalone application from the command line, and then proceed to using Python and C# host programs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, we discuss how this is done with the Q# standalone application from the command line, and then proceed to using Python and C# host programs.
```

---
title: Run Q# with standalone applications or host programs
description: Overview of the different ways to run Q# programs. Command line, Q# Jupyter Notebooks, and classical host programs in Python a .NET language.
author: gillenhaalb
ms.author: a-gibec@microsoft.com
ms.date: 05/15/2020
ms.topic: article
uid: microsoft.quantum.guide.host-programs
---

> # Run Q# with standalone applications or host programs

Author: Agreed. One thing I was wondering though: if we restrict it to saying "command-line applications" and "host programs", doesn't that leave Jupyter NBs out in the cold? What technical term would encompass that as well?

> # Run Q# with standalone applications or host programs

Reviewer: How about "Run Q# standalone or with host programs"?

> # Run Q# with standalone applications or host programs

Author: Changed it to Kitty's suggestion for the upcoming commit; good to discuss during call regardless

In Q#, this would be performed by the following code:

```qsharp
        using (q = Qubit()) {    // allocates qubit for use (automatically in |0>)
            H(q);                // puts qubit in superposition of |0> and |1>
            return MResetZ(q);   // measures qubit, returns result (and resets it to |0> before deallocation)
        }
```

However, this code alone can't be executed by Q#.
For that, it needs to make up the body of an [operation](xref:microsoft.quantum.guide.basics#q-operations-and-functions), which is then executed when called---either directly or by another operation. 
Hence it takes the form
```qsharp
    operation MeasureSuperposition() : Result {
        using (q = Qubit()) {
            H(q);
            return MResetZ(q);
        }
    }
```
and we now have defined an operation, `MeasureSuperposition`, which takes no arguments and returns a value of type [Result](xref:microsoft.quantum.guide.types).
More details on defining callables can be found at [Operations and functions](xref:microsoft.quantum.guide.operationsfunctions).

> For the sake of brevity we refer primarily to Q# *operations* on this page, however all of the concepts discussed work in the same manner for Q# *functions*, as well as any user-defined Q# types. 

Author: I was initially trying to avoid confusion given that we only use operations, but in hindsight that's definitely the way to go both for clarity and efficiency. Will rework with that, thanks!

### Operation defined in a Q# file

The operation is precisely what's called and run by Q#.
However, it requires a few more additions to comprise a full `*.qs` Q# file.

All Q# types and callables are defined within *namespaces*, which the compiler can then open individually 

> Firstly, the [`H`](xref:microsoft.quantum.intrinsic.h) and [`MResetZ`](xref:microsoft.quantum.measurement.mresetz) actually belong to the [Q# Standard Libraries](xref:microsoft.quantum.qsharplibintro).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Firstly, the [`H`](xref:microsoft.quantum.intrinsic.h) and [`MResetZ`](xref:microsoft.quantum.measurement.mresetz) operations actually belong to the [Q# Standard Libraries](xref:microsoft.quantum.qsharplibintro).
```

> To be available for use, their respective *namespaces* need to be opened.

Reviewer 2: Similarly, you can alias namespaces when you open them, which can be helpful if two namespaces conflict.

> All Q# callables and types (both those you define and those intrinsic to the language) are defined within namespaces.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure we want to get into this, but there is a slight edge case in that the Microsoft.Quantum.Core namespace is automatically opened so that callables like `Length` are always available.

To access them, the compiler needs to be made aware of which namespaces to open.

So, the full Q# file containing our operation consists of defining our own namespace, opening the namespaces for the operations our operation uses, and then our operation:

```qsharp
namespace NamespaceName {
    open Microsoft.Quantum.Intrinsic;     // for the H operation
    open Microsoft.Quantum.Measurement;   // for MResetZ

    operation MeasureSuperposition() : Result {
        using (q = Qubit()) { 
            H(q);
            return MResetZ(q);
        }
    }
}
```

### Execution of a Q# program

Now the general execution model of a Q# program becomes clear.

<br/>

> <img src="./images/general_execution_model.png" alt="Q# program execution diagram" width="400">

Reviewer 2: I've generally used a similar figure in talks and presentations: 
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/31516/82469436-dba50700-9a78-11ea-8206-4aa0ad6b9da1.png)
I think the main thing I'd raise is that namespaces don't directly enter program flow, as they're only used to give names to each operation and function.

> <img src="./images/general_execution_model.png" alt="Q# program execution diagram" width="400">

Author: @geduardo What are you referring to with the "sets" relationship? And _if_ we were to dive into the compiler more, I would definitely want some dev input on the details. I agree that it would need a more complete description, but I'm unsure if that would over-clutter the page even more; especially considering that this page is primarily to detail how to use Q# in the different command-line applications/host programs. When writing the execution model stuff, I tried to err on the "need to know" side, trying to restrict it to the basic ideas that let the user see what the difference is between the environments. I'm open to going either way.

> <img src="./images/general_execution_model.png" alt="Q# program execution diagram" width="400">

Reviewer 2: I'm still not quite sure what the arrow between "Q# operation" and "Q# namespace" indicates here. Namespaces aren't callable and have no effect on execution flow other than to assign names (as distinct from Python modules, which do have an impact on execution flow, since `import` statements can have arbitrary side effects).

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/31516/84529824-f85ae600-ac96-11ea-8e61-40df66c4ae9a.png)

> <img src="./images/general_execution_model.png" alt="Q# program execution diagram" width="400">

Author: @cgranade the arrow from the called Q# operation to inside the same namespace is meant to show that the operation has automatic access to all the types and callables defined within the same namespace (as described in the text). I think it aligns with the same functionality as the arrow to "Q# Libraries", indicating access to types and callables defined therein---i.e. not implying that the library itself is callable. Let me know if you think more clarification is needed, and if so, in what manner.

Firstly, the specific operation to be executed has access to any other callables and types defined in the same namespace.

> Thanks to `open` statements, it can also access those from any of the [Q# libraries](xref:microsoft.quantum.libraries). 

Reviewer 2: Same comment as above, you can directly reference a fully qualified name as well.

The operation itself is then executed on a *[target machine](xref:microsoft.quantum.machines)*.
In the future, one such target machine will be a real quantum computer, but there are currently multiple simulators available, each with a particular use.
For our purposes here, the most useful target machine is instance of the full-state simulator, `QuantumSimulator`, which calculates the program's behavior as if it were being executed on a noise-free quantum computer.

So far, we've described what happens when a specific Q# operation is being executed.
Regardless of whether Q# is used in a standalone application or with a host program, this general process is more or less the same---hence the QDK's flexibility.

> The differences between the methods therefore reveal themselves in *how* that Q# operation is called to be executed, and in what manner any results are returned.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The differences between the different ways of calling into the Quantum Development Kit therefore reveal themselves in *how* that Q# operation is called to be executed, and in what manner any results are returned.
```

First, we discuss how this done with the Q# standalone application from the command line, and then proceed to using Python and C# host programs.

> We reserve the standalone application of Q# Jupyter Notebooks for last, because unlike the first three, it does not actually require a Q# file.

Reviewer 2: In other places, we've had the two Q#-only workflows first and then the two interop workflows after that. Strictly speaking, Python also doesn't require Q# files, as you can use the `qsharp.compile` function to compile on the fly; that's definitely not a typical workflow, though.

Author: That's another thing I felt could use some discussion/input. It did feel odd placing it at the end, but at the same time, the (typical) procedural workflow of the two interops seem to flow so naturally from that of the command-line (i.e. given the Q# file, everything we were doing with `EntryPoint`, we simply have the host program call). Given all those similarities, it felt like it might be a little jarring to jump to the notably different Jupyter NB situation (e.g. for now, no arguments), only to then return to the host program flow afterward. 

I don't think that would be an issue if this page were to be more of a quick-reference for each workflow, but what I had in mind was that many people may be coming here even _before_ choosing a workflow. Hence they would be more likely to read through it as a whole piece, getting an idea of how each works to inform their decision. Definitely something I'll bring up to more people in tomorrow's call

## Q# from the command line
One of the easiest ways to get started writing Q# programs is to avoid worrying about separate files and a second language altogether.
Using Visual Studio Code or Visual Studio with the QDK extension allows for a seamless work flow in which we run Q# operations from only a single Q# file.

For this, we will ultimately invoke the program's execution by entering
```bash
dotnet run
```
in the command line.

> Note that the terminal's directory location needs to be the same as the Q# file, so we recommend simply using the integrated terminal in VS Code or Visual Studio.

Reviewer 2: You can also use `--project` to run something in a different folder. Also, I don't think VS2019 has an integrated terminal _per se_.

### Add entry point to Q# file
Of course, most Q# files will contain more than one operation.
So, we need to let the compiler know *which* operation to execute when we provide the `dotnet run` command.

This is done with a simple change to the Q# file itself: add a line with `@EntryPoint()` directly preceding the operation.

Our file from above would therefore become
```qsharp
namespace NamespaceName {
    open Microsoft.Quantum.Intrinsic;     // for the H operation
    open Microsoft.Quantum.Measurement;   // for MResetZ

	@EntryPoint()
    operation MeasureSuperposition() : Result {
        using (q = Qubit()) { 
            H(q);
            return MResetZ(q);
        }
    }
}
```

Now, a call of `dotnet run` from the command line leads to `MeasureSuperposition` being run, and the returned value is then printed directly to the terminal.
So, you will see either `One` or `Zero` printed. 

Note that it doesn't matter if you have more operations defined below it, only `MeasureSuperposition` will be run.

> Additionally, it's no problem if your operation includes [documentation comments](xref:microsoft.quantum.guide.filestructure#documentation-comments) before the operation declaration, the `@EntryPoint()` attribute can be simply placed above them.

Reviewer 2: Has the term "attribute" been defined so far? We may want to explain it a little bit (perhaps in a sidebar), since the term "attribute" is .NET-y but we've used Python-ic or Java-like syntax.

Author: I referenced it as an attribute as that's what the release notes used (and the API ref for it gave me next-to-nothing), but personally I'm not too up on the .NET jargon. I'm nervous more explanation might distract from the page though, considering its utilitarian nature and the fact that many visitors might be here before even starting coding (don't want to hit them with too much jargon at one time). Would those details maybe fit elsewhere? Or if you think it's valuable here, just let me know.

### Operation arguments

> So far, we've only considered an operation that takes no arguments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So far, we've only considered an operation that takes no inputs.
```

Suppose we wanted to perform a similar operation, but on multiple qubits---the number of which is provided as an argument.
Such an operation could be written as
```qsharp
    operation MeasureSuperpositionArray(n : Int) : Result[] {
        mutable resultArray = new Result[n];     // instantiate a length n array for the measurement Results 
        using (qubits = Qubit[n]) {              // allocate a register of n qubits
            ApplyToEach( H , qubits);            // apply H to each qubit in the register (from Microsoft.Quantum.Canon)
            set resultArray = MultiM(qubits);    // measure the array of qubits
            ResetAll(qubits);                    // reset all the qubits
        }
        return resultArray;
    }
```
where the returned value is an array of the measurement results.

> Note that the [`ApplyToEach`](xref:microsoft.quantum.canon.applytoeach) operation is in the `Microsoft.Quantum.Canon` namespace, requiring another `open` statement with the others.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that the [`ApplyToEach`](xref:microsoft.quantum.canon.applytoeach) operation is in the [`Microsoft.Quantum.Canon` namespace](xref:microsoft.quantum.canon), requiring another `open` statement with the others.
```

> If we move the `@EntryPoint()` to precede this new operation (note there can only be one such line in a file), attempting to run it with simply `dotnet run` results in a helpful error message.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If we move the `@EntryPoint()` attribute to precede this new operation (note there can only be one such line in a file), attempting to run it with simply `dotnet run` results in a helpful error message.
```

This message indicates what additional command line options are required, and how to express them.

> The general format for the command line is actually `dotnet run [options]`, and operation arguments are provided there.

Reviewer 2: Should we mention `--` here? If you have a Q# input called `noBuild`, for instance, that will get turned into `--no-build`, which is a valid option for `dotnet run` such that you need `--` to separate options for `dotnet run` from the options for the program being run.

Author: I encountered that when I was exploring the `dotnet run` options with trial-and-error; specifically when I tried using `numQubits` as the Q# input instead of `n`. Completely forgot to inquire more, but I think it's definitely something we should mention. Is there more comprehensive documentation for it anywhere that I can get info from? E.g. does it work from camel case and therefore would turn `numQubitsOne` into `--num-qubits-one`?

Reviewer 2: I think @samarsha may be able to provide more info than I can here. As for where `--` is documented, that's a `dotnet run` thing rather than a Q# thing; if you run Q# standalone executable outside of the .NET Core CLI, then `--` doesn't come up. Thus, I think linking to the [.NET Core CLI docs on `--`](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/tools/dotnet-run#options) could be helpful to explain why `--` is needed.

Reviewer 3: Yes, the standalone executable will convert `camelCase` parameter names to `--kebab-case` option names.

```

yielding an output similar to

```bash
[Zero,One,One,One]
```

This of course extends to multiple arguments.

The error message also provides other options which can be used, including how to change the target machine.

### Different target machines

From the output of our operation thus far, it's clear that the default target machine from the command line is the full-state quauntum simulator, `QuantumSimulator`.
However, we can instruct the operation to be run on a specific target machine with the option `--simulator` (or the shorthand `-s`).

For example, we could run it on [`ResourcesEstimator`](xref:microsoft.quantum.machines.resources-estimator):

```bash
dotnet run -n 4 -s ResourcesEstimator
```

The printed output is then

```bash
Metric          Sum
CNOT            0
QubitClifford   4
R               0
Measure         8
T               0
Depth           0
Width           4
BorrowedWidth   0
```

Note that the [`Reset`](xref:microsoft.quantum.intrinsic.reset) and [`ResetAll`](xref:microsoft.quantum.intrinsic.resetall) operations utilize measurement to reset the qubits to $\ket{0}$, hence the reported 8 measurements as opposed to the 4 which yield the actual results.

> Details on what these metrics indicate can be found [here](xref:microsoft.quantum.machines.resources-estimator#metrics-reported).

Reviewer 2: Generally, "here" as linktext isn't as accessible to screenreaders, and isn't great for SEO.

### Command line execution summary
<br/>

> <img src="./images/command_line_diagram.png" alt="Q# program from command line" width="700">

Reviewer 2: File I/O is intentionally out of scope for Q#; if you want to create a file for storing results, the best way to do so with Q# standalone would be to use shell redirection (`dotnet run > foo.txt`).

> <img src="./images/command_line_diagram.png" alt="Q# program from command line" width="700">

Author: @geduardo I was toying with that as well. I just added a note earlier in the page mentioning just, but I think explicitly including it in the diagrams might risk cluttering them more than necessary. Both because that behavior (printing to the respective console) is a commonality across all the execution methods, and because it's a relatively minor case restricted to those few operations/functions. Let me know what you think when I add the new commits (i.e. if the note at the beginning is sufficient or not)

It's now the *host* program that gets run, and in the course of its execution it calls specific Q# operations from the Q# file.
The core of the interoperability is based on the Q# compiler making the contents of the Q# file accessible to the host program so that they can be called.

One of the main benefits of using a host program is that the classical data returned by the Q# program can then be further processed in the host language.
This could consist of some advanced data processing (e.g. something that can't be performed internally in Q#), and then calling further Q# actions based on those results, or something as simple as plotting the Q# results.

The general scheme is shown here, and we discuss the specific implementations for Python and C# below. 
A sample using an F# host program can be found at the [.NET interoperability samples](https://github.com/microsoft/Quantum/tree/master/samples/interoperability/dotnet).

<br/>
<img src="./images/host_program_diagram.png" alt="Q# program from a host program" width="700">

> [!NOTE]
> The `@EntryPoint()` attribute used for Q# command line applications cannot be used with host programs.

> > An error will be raised if it is present in the Q# file being called by a host. 

Reviewer: @bettinaheim @samarsha would you mind commenting on this? Thank you.

> > An error will be raised if it is present in the Q# file being called by a host. 

Reviewer 3: I think that the recommended way to use a custom host driver is to still use the `@EntryPoint()` attribute, but also create a separate project and add the Q# project as a reference. If you have a C# driver in the same project as a Q# program with an entry point, then the C# compiler sees two `Main` methods and doesn't know which one to choose.

For now, I think that not using the `@EntryPoint()` attribute and putting the C# driver in the same project would also still work, but I think mixing C# and Q# is something we want to avoid going forward.

To work with different host programs, there are no changes required to a `*.qs` Q# file.
The following host program implementations all work with the same Q# file:

```qsharp
namespace NamespaceName {

>     open Microsoft.Quantum.Intrinsic;     // for the H operation

Reviewer 2: Looks like comment spacing and indentation got corrupted in this snippet.

    open Microsoft.Quantum.Measurement;   // for MResetZ and MultiM
	open Microsoft.Quantum.Canon;         // for ApplyToEach

    operation MeasureSuperposition() : Result {
        using (q = Qubit()) { 
            H(q);
            return MResetZ(q);
        }
    }

    operation MeasureSuperpositionArray(n : Int) : Result[] {
        mutable resultArray = new Result[n];
        using (qubits = Qubit[n]) {
            ApplyToEach( H , qubits);

>             set resultArray = MultiM(qubits);

Reviewer 2: We've generally not encouraged MultiM compared to `M.Q.Arrays.ForEach(M, qubits)`. In this case, you could substitute `MResetZ` for `M` to avoid the mutable declaration on L255 and return directly from within the `using`.

            ResetAll(qubits);
        }
        return resultArray;
    }
}
```

Select the tab corresponding to your host language of interest.

### [Python](#tab/tabid-python)

> A python host file is constructed as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Python host program is constructed as follows:
```

1. Import the `qsharp` module, which registers the module loader for Q# interoperability. 
    This allows Q# namespaces to appear as Python modules, from which we can import Q# operations.

2. Import those Q# operations which we will directly invoke---in this case, `MeasureSuperposition` and `MeasureSuperpositionArray`.
    ```python
    import qsharp
    from NamespaceName import MeasureSuperposition, MeasureSuperpositionArray
    ```

>     Note that with the `qsharp` module imported, you can also import operations directly from the Q# library namespaces.

Reviewer 2: Technically, these aren't the Q# operations, but Python stubs for calling into them, similar to the C# stub classes generated by the .NET interop feature for calling into Q# from .NET.

3. Among any other Python code, you can now call those operations on specific target machines, and assign their returns to variables (if they return a value) for further use.

#### Specifying target machines
Calling an operation to be run on a specific target machine is done via different Python methods on the imported operation.
For example, `.simulate(<args>)`, uses the `QuantumSimulator` to run the operation, whereas `.estimate_resources(<args>)` does so on the `ResourcesEstimator`.

> #### Arguments

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Passing inputs to Q\#
```

Arguments for the Q# callable should be provided in the form of a keyword argument, where the keyword is the argument name in the callable definition.
That is, `MeasureSuperpositionArray.simulate(n=4)` is valid, whereas `MeasureSuperpositionArray.simulate(4)` would throw an error.

Therefore, the Python host program 

```python
import qsharp
from NamespaceName import MeasureSuperposition, MeasureSuperpositionArray

single_qubit_result = MeasureSuperposition.simulate()
single_qubit_resources = MeasureSuperposition.estimate_resources()

multi_qubit_result = MeasureSuperpositionArray.simulate(n=4)
multi_qubit_resources = MeasureSuperpositionArray.estimate_resources(n=4)

print('Single qubit:')
print(single_qubit_result)
print(single_qubit_resources)

print('\nMultiple qubits:')
print(multi_qubit_result)
print(multi_qubit_resources)
```

results in an output like the following:

```python
Single qubit:
1
{'CNOT': 0, 'QubitClifford': 1, 'R': 0, 'Measure': 1, 'T': 0, 'Depth': 0, 'Width': 1, 'BorrowedWidth': 0}

Multiple qubits:
[1, 1, 0, 0]
{'CNOT': 0, 'QubitClifford': 4, 'R': 0, 'Measure': 8, 'T': 0, 'Depth': 0, 'Width': 4, 'BorrowedWidth': 0}
```

### [C#](#tab/tabid-csharp)

> A C# host program has multiple components, and works very closely with some components of the QDK, such as the simulators, which are also built on the .NET language.

Reviewer 2: Strictly speaking, there's no such thing as "the .NET language," as .NET is intended to be a multi-language platform (indeed, .NET is also known as the CLR, or _common language runtime_).

The Q# compiler works here by generating an equivalently named C# namespace from the Q# namespace in our Q# file.
It further generates an equivalently named C# class for each of the Q# callables or types defined therein.

> First, we make any classes used in our host program available with `using` statements:

Reviewer 2: Would it be helpful to note that `using` is _roughly_ analogous to `open`?

The latter isn't necessary in our case, but an example of such usage can be found at the  [.NET interoperability sample](https://github.com/microsoft/Quantum/tree/master/samples/interoperability/dotnet).

#### Target machines

Getting back to Q#, we must create an instance of whatever target machine we will execute our operations on.

```csharp
            using var sim = new QuantumSimulator();
```

Using other target machines is as simple as instantiating a different one, although processing the returns could require different action.
For an example, you can check out how to use the [`ResourceEstimator` with C#](xref:microsoft.quantum.machines.resources-estimator).

Each C# class generated from the Q# operations have a `Run` method, the first argument of which must be the target machine instance.
So, to run `MeasureSuperposition` on the `QuantumSimulator`, we use `MeasureSuperposition.Run(sim)`.
The returned results can then be assigned to variables in C# by fetching the `Result` property:

```csharp

>             var single_qubit_result = MeasureSuperposition.Run(sim).Result;

Reviewer 2: Generally, C# code style doesn't use `snake_case`, but uses `camelCase` instead.

```

> [!NOTE]

> > If the Q# operation does not have any returns (i.e. has return type `Unit`), use the `.Wait()` method call instead of `.Result`.

Reviewer 2: We've started trying to use the `await` keyword here, since that works both on methods without a return type (i.e.: `void`) and on methods with a return type. That also has the advantage of looking more like Python's or JavaScript's `async`/`await`.

> The `Run` method is actually executed asynchronously, because this will be the case for real quantum hardware.
> Therefore the `Wait()` method blocks further execution until the task completes.

#### Arguments

Any arguments to the Q# operation are simply passed as additional arguments afer the target machine.
Hence the results of `MeasureSuperpositionArray` on `n=4` qubits would fetched via 

```csharp
            var multi_qubit_result = MeasureSuperpositionArray.Run(sim, 4).Result;
```

A full C# host program could thus look like

```csharp
using System;
using Microsoft.Quantum.Simulation.Simulators;
using NamespaceName;

namespace host
{
    class Program
    {
        static void Main(string[] args)
        {
            using var sim = new QuantumSimulator();

            var single_qubit_result = MeasureSuperposition.Run(sim).Result;

>             var multi_qubit_result = MeasureSuperpositionArray.Run(sim, 4).Result;

Reviewer 2: Similarly here with respect to `camelCase`.

            Console.WriteLine($"Single qubit result: {single_qubit_result}");
            Console.WriteLine($"Multiple qubits result: {multi_qubit_result}");
        }
    }
}
```

At the location of the C# file, the host program can be run from the command line by entering

```bash
dotnet run
```

and in this case you will see output written to the console similar to 

```bash
Single qubit result: Zero
Multiple qubits result: [One,One,Zero,Zero]
```

> [!NOTE]
> Due to the compiler's interoperability with namespaces, we could alternatively make our Q# operations available without the `using NamespaceName;` statement, and simply matching the C# namespace title to it.

> > That is, replacing `namespace host` with `namespace NamespaceName`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> That is, by replacing `namespace host` with `namespace NamespaceName`.
```

***

## Q# Jupyter Notebooks
Q# Jupyter Notebooks make use of the IQ# kernel, which allows you to define, compile, and run Q# operations in a single notebook---all alongside instructions, notes, and other content.
This means that while it is possible to import and use the contents of `*.qs` Q# files, they are not necessary in the execution model.

Here, we will detail how to run the Q# operations defined above, but another good introduction to using Q# Jupyter Notebooks is provided at [Intro to Q# and Jupyter Notebook](https://github.com/microsoft/Quantum/blob/master/samples/getting-started/intro-to-iqsharp/Notebook.ipynb).

### Defining operations

In a Q# Jupyter Notebook, you enter Q# code just as we would from inside the namespace of a Q# file.

So, we can enable access to operations from the [Q# standard libraries](xref:microsoft.quantum.qsharplibintro) with `open` statements for their respective namespaces.
Upon running a cell with such a statement, the definitions from those namespaces are available throughout the workspace.

> [!NOTE]

> > Operations from [Microsoft.Quantum.Intrinsic](xref:microsoft.quantum.intrinsic) and [Microsoft.Quantum.Canon](xref:microsoft.quantum.canon) (e.g. [`H`](xref:microsoft.quantum.intrinsic.h) and [`ApplyToEach`](xref:microsoft.quantum.canon.applytoeach)) are automatically available in Q# Jupyter Notebooks.

Reviewer 2: Would it be good to clarify that this is true within cells, and not for code brought in from external Q# source files?

Similarly, defining operations requires only writing the Q# code and running the cell.

<img src="./images/jupyter_op_def_crop.png" alt="Jupyter cell defining Q# operations" width="600">

The output then lists those operations, which can then be called from future cells.

### Target machines

The functionality to run operations on specific target machines is provided via [IQ# Magic Commands](xref:microsoft.quantum.guide.quickref.iqsharp).
For example, `%simulate` makes use of the `QuantumSimulator`, and `%estimate` uses the `ResourcesEstimator`:

<img src="./images/jupyter_no_args_sim_est_crop.png" alt="Simulate and estimate resources Jupyter cell" width="500">

> ### Arguments

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Passing inputs to functions and operations
```

> Currently the execution magic commands can only be used with operations that take no arguments. 

Reviewer 2: +@rmshaffer for awareness.

Reviewer 4: Thanks! I've opened a task for myself to update this once passing arguments is allowed.

Reviewer 4: Two quick updates here: As of the next release, the execution magic commands will be able to accept arguments. And also, the syntax highlighting for magic commands has been updated, so probably a couple of the screenshots here will need to be replaced. I'm planning to make those updates here; this is tracked by AB#15207.

---
title: Run Q# standalone or with host programs
description: Overview of the different ways to run Q# programs: command line, Q# Jupyter Notebooks, and classical host programs in Python or a .NET language.
author: gillenhaalb
ms.author: a-gibec@microsoft.com
ms.date: 05/15/2020
ms.topic: article
uid: microsoft.quantum.guide.host-programs
---

> # Run Q# standalone or with host programs

Reviewer 5: I don't know if having Standalone in the title is the best option, if we have Command Line Applications in the installation guide. We should try to go with one to avoid user's confusion.

Author: @geduardo @KittyYeungQ @cgranade Only thing left for this PR is needing consensus on the title. If we want it to be something along these lines, I don't think we should specifically refer to the comparison as between the command line and host programs, because that completely excludes Q# Jupyter NBs. Hence the use of "standalone" in an attempt to include it (though not sure if that's valid). 

Alternatively, we could go in the less-specific direction and consider something like "Ways to call a Q# program", but I think that would open the door to more confusion.

Thoughts?

Reviewer: We have an issue #883 that pointed out that we don't have any standalone instruction for IDEs other than VS Code. Can we write an article for that? Then we can add that here as the true "standalone" together with the command line experience on VS Code here.

Reviewer 2: I think the word "standalone" has started to take on a lot of different meanings, in that it can refer to the Q# standalone executable feature, the use of Q# without an explicit host program (whether through IQ# or standalone executables), or the use of the Quantum Development Kit without an editor integration extension. To wit, you can write a Python or .NET interoperability host without an editor extension, which is very much so standalone in the third sense, but I wouldn't think of that as standalone in the first or second sense.

Author: @KittyYeungQ @geduardo @cgranade, RE: Chris's comment.
I agree, it's become aligned with so many different situations that it seems to have developed an inability to reasonably describe _any_ particular situation. Perhaps this page might be an opportunity to lay down some concrete wording and remove such ambiguities.

Regardless of what situation ends up being called what, I think a small paragraph describing those nomenclatures wouldn't be jarringly out of place at the beginning of this page, and might be appreciated by the readers.

If we do go that route, from my current understanding I would vote 
- "standalone" be reclaimed by the standalone executable from the .NET CLI, 
- "host program" be reserved for all situations where it's their classical program which calls to Q# (this one's already pretty cut and dried)
- Q# Jupyter Notebooks stay as it's own unique party
- and try in general to avoid confusing phrasing that intermingles these with the other variables involved with the user-Q# interface (e.g. editor integration extensions, etc.).

My understanding could be stunted here, and I trust Chris know best with regard to what pieces of the interface and execution model are independent or inseparable. But in general I'm interested to hear all your thoughts, because I think this is a decent opportunity to remove ambiguity both internally and in the docs

One of the Quantum Development Kit's greatest strengths is its flexibility across platforms and development environments.
However, this also means that new Q# users may find themselves confused or overwhelmed by the numerous options found in the [install guide](xref:microsoft.quantum.install).
On this page, we explain what happens when a Q# program is run, and compare the different ways in which users can do so.

A primary distinction is between running Q#

>     - as a standalone application, where Q# is the only language involved and the program is invoked directly, or

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - with the command line interface as a standalone application, where Q# is the only language involved and the program is invoked directly, or
```

Author: Same as comment below; switching to this would leave out Jupyter

Reviewer 2: If we want to adopt the suggestion, we could break IQ# Notebooks out into their own third line. That said, I agree, we need to keep IQ# Notebooks front-and-center in this list.

Author: Tried a middle ground in new commit: command line and NBs still under umbrella of "standalone applications", but brought both out explicitly with a sublist

        using (q = Qubit()) { 
            H(q);
            return MResetZ(q);
        }
    }
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> Namespaces can also be *aliased* when opened, which can be helpful if callable/type names in two namespaces conflict.
> For example, we could instead use `open Microsoft.Quantum.Instrinsic as NamespaceWithH;` above, and then call `H` via `NamespaceWithH.H(<qubit>)`.

> [!NOTE]
> One exception to all of this is the [`Microsoft.Quantum.Core`](xref:microsoft.quantum.core) namespace, which is always automatically opened.
> Therefore, callables like [`Length`](xref:microsoft.quantum.core.length) can always be used directly.

### Execution on target machines

Now the general execution model of a Q# program becomes clear.

<br/>
<img src="./images/general_execution_model.png" alt="Q# program execution diagram" width="400">

Firstly, the specific callable to be executed has access to any other callables and types defined in the same namespace.
It also access those from any of the [Q# libraries](xref:microsoft.quantum.libraries), but those must be referenced either via their full name, or through the use of `open` statements described above.

> The callable itself is then executed on a *[target machine](xref:microsoft.quantum.machines)*.
> Such target machines can be actual quantum hardware (as currently in private preview on Azure Quantum), or the multiple simulators available as part of the QDK.
> For our purposes here, the most useful target machine is an instance of the [full-state simulator](xref:microsoft.quantum.machines.full-state-simulator), `QuantumSimulator`, which calculates the program's behavior as if it were being executed on a noise-free quantum computer.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The callable itself is then executed on a *[target machine](xref:microsoft.quantum.machines)*.
Such target machines can be actual quantum hardware or the multiple simulators available as part of the QDK.
For our purposes here, the most useful target machine is an instance of the [full-state simulator](xref:microsoft.quantum.machines.full-state-simulator), `QuantumSimulator`, which calculates the program's behavior as if it were being executed on a noise-free quantum computer.
```
I would remove that since it'll probably be forgotten to update in the future. In case we want to mention Azure Quantum when is available we can go and add t.

## Q# from the command line
One of the easiest ways to get started writing Q# programs is to avoid worrying about separate files and a second language altogether.
Using Visual Studio Code or Visual Studio with the QDK extension allows for a seamless work flow in which we run Q# callables from only a single Q# file.

For this, we will ultimately invoke the program's execution by entering
```bash
dotnet run
```
in the command line.
The simplest workflow is when the terminal's directory location is the same as the Q# file, which can be easily handled alongside Q# file editing by using the integrated terminal in VS Code, for example.
However, the [`dotnet run` command](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/core/tools/dotnet-run) accepts numerous options, and the program can also be run from a different location by simply providing `--project <PATH>` with the location of the Q# file.

> ### Add entry point to Q# file

Reviewer 2: It may be good to mention the restrictions on entry points here (e.g.: no type parameters, no qubit inputs, etc.). @samarsha may have more input here as well.

Author: @cgranade I agree, I think that would be beneficial here. Definitely could use some input on the specifics of the restrictions then.

Also, for some reason I'm unable to reply (or quote-reply) to your above comment, so I'll do that here. The arrow from the called Q# operation to inside the same namespace is meant to show that the operation has automatic access to all the types and callables defined within the same namespace, which is described in the text. I think it aligns with the same functionality as the arrow to "Q# Libraries", indicating access to types and callables defined therein---i.e. not implying that the library itself is callable. Let me know if you think more clarification is needed, and if so, in what manner.

> Most Q# files will contain more than one callable, so naturally we need to let the compiler know *which* callable to execute when we provide the `dotnet run` command.

Reviewer 2: General markdownlint rules used on this repo suggest leaving a blank line after headers.
```suggestion

Most Q# files will contain more than one callable, so naturally we need to let the compiler know *which* callable to execute when we provide the `dotnet run` command.
```

To run `MeasureSuperpositionArray` for `n=4` qubits, we therefore use

```bash
dotnet run -n 4
```

yielding an output similar to

```bash
[Zero,One,One,One]
```

This of course extends to multiple arguments.

> [!NOTE]
> Argument names defined in `camelCase` are slightly altered by the compiler to be accepted as Q# inputs. 
> For example, if instead of `n`, we used the name `numQubits` above, then this input would be provided in the command line via `--num-qubits 4` instead of `-n 4`.

The error message also provides other options which can be used, including how to change the target machine.

### Different target machines

As the outputs from our operations thus far have been the expected results of their action on real qubits, it's clear that the default target machine from the command line is the full-state quauntum simulator, `QuantumSimulator`.
However, we can instruct callables to be run on a specific target machine with the option `--simulator` (or the shorthand `-s`).

For example, we could run it on [`ResourcesEstimator`](xref:microsoft.quantum.machines.resources-estimator):

```bash
dotnet run -n 4 -s ResourcesEstimator
```

The printed output is then

> ```bash

Reviewer 2: Would it make sense as a future improvement to have this in a tab next to Jupyter Notebook's visual output?

Author: @cgranade referring to the output code blocks on this page specifically? Personally I think it would run a risk of accidentally conflating the two methods, especially as the audience here will be a lot of new/prospective users. 

I did consider potentially putting each of the methods in its own tab, but ultimately felt that approach was more fitting for the install instructions, etc., where users have already "picked a lane". Supposing a lot of readers on this page will be here to _decide_ which method they'd like to start using, I thought it best to leave things in distinct sections which mirror each other in what's being done. That way each section can stand fully on its own (useful for people who have picked a lane and come looking for more details on that method), but at the same time be an easily comprehensible overview for those who would like to read it through and see how the methods compare.

            var multiQubitResult = await MeasureSuperpositionArray.Run(sim, 4);

            Console.WriteLine($"Single qubit result: {singleQubitResult}");
            Console.WriteLine($"Multiple qubit result: {multiQubitResult}");
        }
    }
}
```

At the location of the C# file, the host program can be run from the command line by entering
```bash
dotnet run
```
and in this case you will see output written to the console similar to 
```bash
Single qubit result: One
Multiple qubit result: [One,One,Zero,Zero]
```

> [!NOTE]
> Due to the compiler's interoperability with namespaces, we could alternatively make our Q# callables available without the `using NamespaceName;` statement, and simply matching the C# namespace title to it.
> That is, by replacing `namespace host` with `namespace NamespaceName`.

#### Including the resources estimator

The [`ResourcesEstimator`](xref:microsoft.quantum.machines.resources-estimator) requires a slightly different implementation to retrieve the output.

Firstly, instead of instantiating them as a variable with a `using` statement (as we do with the `QuantumSimulator`), we more directly instantiate objects of the class via

```csharp

>             ResourcesEstimator estimatorSingleQ = new ResourcesEstimator();
>             ResourcesEstimator estimatorMultiQ = new ResourcesEstimator();

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            var estimatorSingleQ = new ResourcesEstimator();
            var estimatorMultiQ = new ResourcesEstimator();
```

```

Notice that instead of a single target simulator to be used by multiple Q# operations, we have instantiated one for each. 
This is because the objects themselves are modified when used as target machines, and their results can then be retrieved afterwards with the class method `.ToTSV()`.

To run the operations on the resource estimators, we use

```csharp
            await MeasureSuperposition.Run(estimatorSingleQ);
            await MeasureSuperpositionArray.Run(estimatorMultiQ, 4);
```
and then fetch the results as tab-separated-values (TSV) with `estimatorSingleQ.ToTSV()` and `estimatorMultiQ.ToTSV()`.

So, a full C# host program making use of both the `QuantumSimulator` and `ResourcesEstimator` could take the form:

```csharp
using System;
using System.Threading.Tasks;
using Microsoft.Quantum.Simulation.Simulators;
using NamespaceName;

namespace host
{
    static class Program
    {
        static async Task Main(string[] args)
        {
            using var sim = new QuantumSimulator();

>             ResourcesEstimator estimatorSingleQ = new ResourcesEstimator();
>             ResourcesEstimator estimatorMultiQ = new ResourcesEstimator();

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            var estimatorSingleQ = new ResourcesEstimator();
            var estimatorMultiQ = new ResourcesEstimator();
```
